======================
UKTM model description
======================

UKTM has been developed at the UCL Energy Institute over the last two years as a successor to the UK MARKAL model75. It is based on the model generator TIMES (The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System), which is developed and maintained by the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP) of the International Energy Agency (IEA)76. 
UKTM is a technology-oriented, dynamic, linear programming optimisation model representing the entire UK energy system from imports and domestic production of fuel resources, through fuel processing and supply, explicit representation of infrastructures, conversion to secondary energy carriers (including electricity, heat and hydrogen), end-use technologies and energy service demands. Generally, it minimizes the total welfare costs (under perfect foresight) to meet the exogenously given sectoral energy demands under a range of input assumptions and additional constraints, thereby delivering a cost optimal, system-wide solution for the energy transition for the coming decades. 
A key strength of UKTM is that it represents the whole UK energy system under a given decarbonisation objective, which means that trade-offs between mitigation efforts in one sector versus another can be explored. The model is divided into three supply side sectors (resources & trade, processing & infrastructure and electricity generation) and five demand sectors (residential, services, industry, transport and agriculture). All sectors are calibrated to the base year 2010, for which the existing stock of energy technologies and their characteristics are known and taken into account. A large variety of future supply and demand technologies are represented by techno-economic parameters such as the capacity factor, energy efficiency, lifetime, capital costs, O&M costs etc. Moreover, assumptions are also laid down for attributes not directly connected to individual technologies, such as energy prices, resource availability and the potentials of renewable energy sources. UKTM has a time resolution of 16 time-slices (four seasons and four intra-day times-slices). In addition to all energy flows, UKTM tracks CO2, CH4, N2O and HFC emissions. For more information on UKTM see refs77,78.
In addition to its academic use, UKTM is the central long-term energy system pathway model used for policy analysis at the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) and the Committee on Climate Change (CCC).
